feat: Simp, made simple (#98)
leanprover-community/blog: posts/simp-made-simple.md

<!-- TEASER_END -->

First, we detail the inner workings of `simp` relevant to simprocs.

# How `simp` works

In this section we present some of the inner workings of `simp`.

First we give an overview of the way `simp` works, then we delve into the specifics by introducing:
* The `SimpM` monad, which is the metaprogramming monad holding the information relevant to a `simp` call.
* `Step`, the Lean representation of a single simplification step.
* `Simproc`, the Lean representation of simprocs.

All the `simp`-specific declarations introduced in this section are in the `Lean.Meta` or `Lean.Meta.Simp` namespace.

## Overview

When calling `simp` in a proof, we give it a *simp context*.
This is made of a few different things, but for our purposes think of it as the set of lemmas/simprocs `simp` is allowed to rewrite with, namely the default simp lemmas/simprocs plus the lemmas/simprocs added explicitly minus the lemmas/simprocs removed explicitly.
For example, `simp [foo, -bar]` means "Simplify using the standard simp lemmas/simprocs except `bar`, with `foo` added".

A perhaps surprising fact is that every simp lemma is internally turned into a simproc for `simp`'s consumption.

> From then on, we will refer to simp lemmas/simprocs as *procedures*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From now on, we will refer to simp lemmas/simprocs as *procedures*.
```

  For `pre`, this means visiting the children of the expression.

  For `post`, this is equivalent to returning `done`. -/
  | continue (e? : Option Expr := none)
  deriving Inhabited, Repr
```
Note: The above snippet is a simplification and the constructors as shown actually belong to `Lean.TransformStep`, which `Lean.Meta.Simp.DStep` is an `abbrev` of.

## The `SimpM` monad

[`SimpM`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.SimpM#doc) is the monad that tracks the current context `simp` is running in (what `simp` theorems are available, etc) and what has been done so far (e.g. number of steps so far, theorems used).
In particular this also captures the `MetaM` context.

## `Simproc`s

A simproc takes in an expression and outputs a simplification step, possibly after modifying the current simp state (e.g. by adding new goals to be closed by the discharger).
This behavior is formally encapsulated by the [`Simproc`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.Simproc#doc) type:
```lean
abbrev Simproc  := Expr → SimpM  Step
```

`simp` does not consume bare elements of type `Simproc`.

> Instead, a simproc is an element of type `Simproc` annotated with tbe extra data mentioned in the overview subsection, like whether the simproc is `pre` or `post`.

Reviewer: The section on Step is great, and contains a lot of detail. These latter sections seem somewhat rushed and the ending of the blogpost feels abrupt to me.
For example, this sentence about annotations with extra data... could that be accompanied by a code block that shows exactly what is going on?

And would it make sense to give the exact definition of the `simpM` monad, and add a bit more detail on it?

Maybe you could even end with a little cliff hanger about what will happen in the final blogpost?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good! I'm planning on spending some extra time adding stuff about `SimpM` to the post this coming month.

Reviewer 3: 🏓  @Paul-Lez and @YaelDillies, it would be great to get this out! :-)

Reviewer 2: @kim-em this is now ready to review if you fancy taking a look;) 
If you're very busy, I think the first part is probably more ready/polished than the second one!

> Similarly, there is a [`Simproc`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.DSimproc#doc) type:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Similarly, there is a [`DSimproc`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.DSimproc#doc) type:
```

In the case where the two expressions `e` and `e'` are definitionally equal, one can actually describe a simplification step using a simple structure, namely `DStep` (where the "d" stands for "definitional"). This is obtained by replacing each occurrence of `Result` in the definition of `Step` by `Expr` (intuitively, we no longer need to specify a proof that `e` and `e'` are equal since this is just `rfl`, so we only need to return the simplified expression `e'`):
```lean
inductive DStep where
  /-- Return expression without visiting any subexpressions. -/
  | done (e : Expr)
  /--
  Visit expression (which should be different from current expression) instead.
  The new expression `e` is passed to `pre` again.
  -/
  | visit (e : Expr)
  /--
  Continue transformation with the given expression (defaults to current expression).
  For `pre`, this means visiting the children of the expression.

  For `post`, this is equivalent to returning `done`. -/
  | continue (e? : Option Expr := none)
  deriving Inhabited, Repr
```
Note: The above snippet is a simplification and the constructors as shown actually belong to `Lean.TransformStep`, which `Lean.Meta.Simp.DStep` is an `abbrev` of.

> <span style="color:red">**(Yaël): Why is there a mismatch in docstrings between `Step.continue` and `DStep.continue`? [Zulip](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/270676-lean4/topic/Simp.2EStep.2Econtinue.20vs.20Simp.2EDStep.2Econtinue/with/509056271)**</span>

Reviewer 5: Do you want to remove this?

  Let's consider the simproc `reduceIte` (also in the first post!). 
  This takes expressions of the form `if h then a else b` and outputs `a` 
  (resp. `b`) if `h` can be simplified to `True` (resp. `False`). 
  Since `a` and `b` could be arbitrarily complicated expressions, it makes sense to try and simplify them further, 
  so this simproc uses `visit` to output the result of this simplification.
- `continue`. 
  It turns out that both `Nat.reduceDvd` and `reduceIte` also use the `continue` constructor. 
  Indeed, both these simprocs rely on the fact that some part of the expression 
  considered is simplifiable (e.g. the condition in the `if` statement). 
  When this is not the case, the `continue` constructor signals to `simp` that it should 
  *not* attempt to simplify the expression again using the same simproc to prevent 
  the simplification procedure from looping around.
  More generally, `continue` is used in most simprocs as the "default" output
  produced when the simproc was not able to make any simplification.

In the case where the two expressions `e` and `e'` are definitionally equal,
one can actually describe a simplification step using a simple structure,

> namely `DStep` (where the "d" stands for "definitional"). 

Reviewer 2: Indeed - moved this elsewhere

  ```lean
  structure Simp.State where
    cache        : Cache
    congrCache   : CongrCache
    dsimpCache   : ExprStructMap Expr
    usedTheorems : UsedSimps
    numSteps     : Nat
    diag         : Diagnostics
  ```
  This is something we can achieve using the `StateRefT` monad transformer, which takes as input a state type (`Simp.State` in our case) and a monad, and creates a new monad that can read _and write_ this state. In other words, `StateRefT Simp.State MetaM` is a souped up version of `MetaM` that can now track extra information by storing (and updating) at term of type `Simp.State`.

3) The second monad transformer application: `ReaderT Simp.Context $ StateRefT Simp.State MetaM`. 
  The `SimpM` monad should also be able to access the "context" that `simp` is running in, e.g. which simp theorems it has access to and so on. This is captured by the type `Simp.Context`.
  Here, the situation is not quite the same as when we were adding a `Simp.State` state to `MetaM`: while we will often want to change the state during the `simp` call, the context should always be the same (in programmer lingo: _immutable_)

>   Thus, we use a different monad transformer called `ReaderT`, which is almost identical to `StateT`, but outputs a new monad that can only read the type passed as parameter.

Reviewer 6: Mildly pedantic, but `ReaderT` can change the value in the calls it makes (e.g. [`ReaderT.adapt`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/Init/Prelude.html#ReaderT.adapt) as equivalent to `modify` for a Reader). In programming language nerd terms, `State(Ref)T` gives you a global variable, and `ReaderT` gives you dynamic scoping.

(Does simp in practice use that though?)

## `Step`

[`Step`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.Step#doc) is the type that represents a single step in the simplification loop. In `simp`'s algorithm, a step intuitively corresponds to two pieces of information:
1) The **result** of simplifying an expression `e`,
2) The **location** of what should be simplified next, and in which **direction** (pre or post).

The result of simplifying `e` is encoded as an expression `e'` and a proof that `e = e'`.
This is encapsulated by the [`Result`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.Result#doc)
structure:
```lean
structure Result where
  /-- The new expression `e'` -/
  expr   : Expr
  /-- The proof that `e = e'` -/
  proof? : Option Expr := none
  -- Note, `Result` currently has an extra `cache` field that is both deprecated
  -- and irrelevant to our current discussion.
```
> The proof is optional:
> If `proof?` is set to its default `none` value, the equality is assumed to be definitional.

> The proof is allowed to be an arbitrary `Expr`,
> i.e. nothing ensures that it actually is a proof that `e = e'`.

> > It is up to the author of the procedure to make sure that the generated proof terms are valid.

Author: My idea was to use the quote as an aparte

  If `e'` has no child, then we run postprocedures on `e'`.
3. Don't simplify further.
  Preprocedures are tried on the next child of the parent expression.
  If there is no such child, then postprocedures are tried on the parent expression.

The three possibilities above correspond to the three constructors of `Step`:
```lean
inductive Step where
  /-- Try preprocedures on the simplified expression. -/
  | visit (e : Result)
  /--
  For `pre` procedures, continue transformation by visiting subexpressions, and then
  executing `post` procedures.

  For `post` procedures, this is equivalent to returning `visit`.
  -/
  | continue (e? : Option Result := none)
  /-- Returns the result without visiting any subexpressions. -/
  | done (r : Result)
-- Note: the docstrings here are simplified versions of the real docstrings (which can be found in the Lean source code)
```
> If a procedure fails to simplify an expression, it should return `continue none`.
  Both `visit` and `done` signify success.

Whenever a simproc is called on a given expression, it outputs a `Step`, which determines what will happen next during the `simp` call. 

> Since every simproc call is running a metaprogram to produce the output `Step`, the constructor that ends up used may vary according to the input. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Since every simproc call is running a metaprogram to produce the output `Step`, the constructor that ends up being used may vary according to the input.
```

> For example, a given simproc may in some cases use `visit` and in others use `continue`.

Author: This sentence is quite strange to me: it bases itself off the assumption that people expect that a simproc always uses the same `Step` constructor, but four lines above we explain how to use the constructors according to whether the simproc has failed or not. Could you repackage the info in a way that acknowledges the previous sentence?

  Either way, the output is in simp normal form, so there is no need to attempt to simplify it further. 
  Thus, the simproc uses `done` to this result.
- `visit` indicates (for a pre-procedure) that a simplification has been done but that pre-procedures should be tried again on the simplified expression.
  Let's consider the simproc `reduceIte` (also in the first post!). 
  This takes expressions of the form `if h then a else b` and outputs `a` 
  (resp. `b`) if `h` can be simplified to `True` (resp. `False`). 
  Since `a` and `b` could be arbitrarily complicated expressions, it makes sense to try and simplify them further, 
  so this simproc uses `visit` to output the result of this simplification.

## The `SimpM` monad

In this section, we take a look at another key component of the internals of simp, namely the `SimpM` monad. 

### `SimpM`

[`SimpM`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.SimpM#doc) is the monad that tracks the current context `simp` is running in (what `simp` theorems are available, etc) and what has been done so far (e.g. number of steps so far, theorems used).

> In particular this also captures the `MetaM` context.

Author: ```suggestion
In particular it also captures the `MetaM` context.
```

Let's go through this in more detail. The monad `SimpM` is defined using monad transformers as follows:
```lean

> abbrev SimpM := ReaderT Simp.MethodsRef $ ReaderT Simp.Context $ StateRefT Simp.State MetaM

Author: ```suggestion
abbrev SimpM := ReaderT Simp.MethodsRef <| ReaderT Simp.Context <| StateRefT Simp.State MetaM
```

```

Let's go through these steps one by one.

1) The monad `MetaM`. This is one of the fundamental monads for metaprogramming in Lean. 
  The state of `MetaM` allows one to access things like:
    - Information about the file we're running in (e.g. name, imports, etc)
    - Information about what definitions/theorems we're allowed to use
    - What local variables/declarations we have access to

2) The first monad transformer application: `StateRefT Simp.State MetaM`. 
  The idea here is the following: since the goal of the `SimpM` monad is to track the state of a `simp` call
  (i.e. what's happening, as the program runs), we need to capture more information than what `MetaM` gives us. 

>   Specifially, we want a monad that can track the state of what's happening via the following structure: 

Author: ```suggestion
  Specifically, we want a monad that can track what's happening via the following structure: 
```
"the state" and "what's happening" seem to refer to the piece of information

    ```lean
    structure Simp.State where
      cache        : Cache
      congrCache   : CongrCache
      dsimpCache   : ExprStructMap Expr
      usedTheorems : UsedSimps
      numSteps     : Nat
      diag         : Diagnostics
    ```

>   This is something we can achieve using the `StateRefT` monad transformer, which takes as input a state type (`Simp.State` in our case) and a monad, and creates a new monad that can read _and write_ this state. In other words, `StateRefT Simp.State MetaM` is a souped up version of `MetaM` that can now track extra information by storing (and updating) at term of type `Simp.State`.

Author: ```suggestion
  This is something we can achieve using the `StateRefT` monad transformer, which takes as input a state type (`Simp.State` in our case) and a monad, and creates a new monad that can read _and write_ this state.
  In other words, `StateRefT Simp.State MetaM` is a souped up version of `MetaM` that can now track extra information by storing (and updating) a term of type `Simp.State`.
```

3) The second monad transformer application: `ReaderT Simp.Context $ StateRefT Simp.State MetaM`. 

>   The `SimpM` monad should also be able to access the "context" that `simp` is running in, e.g. which simp theorems it has access to and so on. This is captured by the type `Simp.Context`.

Author: ```suggestion
  The `SimpM` monad should also be able to access the "context" that `simp` is running in, e.g. which simp theorems it has access to and so on.
  This is captured by the type `Simp.Context`.
```

>   Here, the situation is not quite the same as when we were adding a `Simp.State` state to `MetaM`: while we will often want to change the state during the `simp` call, we don't expect the context to need to change. In programmer lingo, the context should be _immutable_.

Author: ```suggestion
  Here, the situation is not quite the same as when we were adding a `Simp.State` state to `MetaM`:
  while we will often want to change the state during the `simp` call, we will never need to change the context.
  In programmer lingo, the context should be _immutable_.
```

  Thus, we use a different monad transformer called `ReaderT`, which is almost identical to `StateT`, but outputs a new monad where one can only read the type passed as parameter. 

>     > For completness: when working with `ReaderT`, one can still locally overide the

Author: ```suggestion
    > For completness: when working with `ReaderT`, one can still locally override the
```

    > value of the variable that the monad keeps track of by using `withReader`. Intuitively, 
    > the difference between `State(Ref)T` and `ReaderT` is the following: 
    > - In `State(Ref)T`, one has access to a global variable that can be modified at 

>     >   will, 

Author: ```suggestion
    > - In `State(Ref)T`, one has access to a global variable that can be modified at will,
```

>     > - In `ReaderT`, given a program `x : ReaderT a m`, one can only chose to *execute* `x` with

Author: ```suggestion
    > - In `ReaderT`, given a program `x : ReaderT a m`, one can only choose to *execute* `x` with
```

    >   a different context. In particular, the context before and after the execution of `x` stays the same.

4) The final monad transformer application: `ReaderT Simp.MethodsRef $ ReaderT Simp.Context $ StateRefT Simp.State MetaM`. 
  This outputs a monad that has access to `Simp.Method` (passed via a ref). 

>   This capture the "pre" and "post" procedures that `simp` can use, as well as the discharger that `simp` can use, etc.

Author: This is ambiguous: do you mean `simp` the tactic, or `simp` a tactic call?
```suggestion
  This capture the "pre" and "post" procedures that a given `simp` call can use, as well as the discharger that a given `simp` call can use, etc.
```

## `Simproc`s

> We can finally define what a `simproc` is formally. 

Author: ```suggestion
Let's now formally define what a `simproc` is.
```

> Recall that intuitively, a simproc takes in an expression and outputs a simplification step, possibly after modifying the current `SimpM` state (e.g. by adding new goals to be closed by the discharger).

Author: ```suggestion
Recall that, intuitively, a simproc takes in an expression and outputs a simplification step, possibly after modifying the current `SimpM` state (e.g. by adding new goals to be closed by the discharger).
```

This behavior is formally encapsulated by the [`Simproc`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/find/?pattern=Lean.Meta.Simp.Simproc#doc) type:
```lean

> abbrev Simproc  := Expr → SimpM  Step

Author: ```suggestion
abbrev Simproc := Expr → SimpM Step
```

```

Concretely, it is helpful to think of a simproc as a function (or rather metaprogram) of the form
```lean
def mySimproc (e : Expr) : SimpM Step := do
  -- Various manipulations involving the expression `e`
  ...
  let step : Step := ...
  ...
  return step
```

The picture above is however a slight oversimplification, as `simp` does not consume bare elements of type `Simproc`. 

> Instead, a simproc is an element of type `Simproc` annotated with the extra data mentioned in the overview subsection, like whether the simproc is `pre` or `post`, and what kind of expression it matches on. 

Author: I must say it's confusing that a simproc isn't just an element of type `Simproc`. I expect people will read the whole paragraph before realising. Could we have a warning much earlier, or something like that?

Note: The above snippet is a simplification and the constructors as shown actually belong to `Lean.TransformStep`, which `Lean.Meta.Simp.DStep` is an `abbrev` of.

> The reader should note that `DStep` cannot be used for writing simprocs, even though it might be the case that a
> given simplification step happens to produce an expression that is definitionally equal to the original one.

## Exploring the `SimpM` monad via simprocs

In the next blog post, we will cover in detail how to implement simprocs that are useful for proving theorems in Lean. 
In the meantime, to whet the reader's appetite, let's have a go at exploring the `SimpM` monad's internals using simprocs.

> Throughout this section, all code will be assumed to have `open Lean Elab Meta Simp`.

More specifically, let's try to use simprocs to output information about the state of `SimpM` during a given simp call.

The first thing we may want to print out is the expression that is currently being traversed. As a simproc, this would correspond to

```lean
def printExpressions (e : Expr) : SimpM Step := do
  Lean.logInfo m!"{e}"
  return .continue

-- declare the simproc
simproc_decl printExpr (_) := printExpressions
```

> The last line is needed to "declare" the simproc officially - this is where we specify information like whether this is a pre/post procedure, and what expression we're matching on (here, we match on the pattern `_`, i.e. on everything!). 

Author: ```suggestion
The last line is needed to "declare" the simproc officially - this is where we can specify priority, whether this is a pre/post procedure and what expression we're matching on (here, we match on the pattern `_`, i.e. on everything!). 
```
We didn't mention the pattern on L.46-47. Should we?
